Tip 23: Prefer Operators to Visual Commands Where Possible
==========================================================

_Visual mode may be more intuitive than Vim's Normal mode of operation, but it
has a weakness: it doens't always play well with the dot command. We can route
around this weakness by using Normal mode operatos when appropriate._

Suppose that we want to transform the following list of links to make them
shout:

```
visual_mode/list-of-links.html
------------------------------
<a href="#">one</a>
<a href="#">two</a>
<a href="#">three</a>
```

We can select the inner contents of a tag by running `vit`, which can be read
as _visually select inside_ the _tag_. The `it` command is a special king of
motion called a text object, which we'll cover in detail in Tip 51, on page
120.


Using a Visual Operator
-----------------------

In Visual mode, we make a selection and then act on it. In this case, we could
use the `U` command, which converts the selected characters to uppercase (`:h
v_U`). See Table 4, _Uppercasing in Visual Mode_, on page 44.

Having transformed the first line, we now want to perform the same change on
the next two lines. How about we try using the Dot Formula?

Keystrokes  | Buffer Contents
----------- | ----------------
`{start}`   | <a href="#">one</a>
            | <a href="#">two</a>
            | <a href="#">three</a>
------------|----------------------
`vit`       | <a href="#">one</a>
            | <a href="#">two</a>
            | <a href="#">three</a>
`U`         | <a href="#">one</a>
------------|--------------------
            | <a href="#">two</a>
            | <a href="#">three</a>

Running `j.` advances our cursor to the next line and then repeats the last
change. It works fine on line two, but if we try it again we end up with this
strange-looking result:

```html
<a href="#">ONE</a>
<a href="#">TWO</a>
<a href="#">THRee</a>
```


Do yo see what's happened? When a Visual mode command is repeated, it affects
the same range of text (see `:h visual-repeat`). In this case, the original
command affected a word consisting of three letters. This works fine for line
two, which happens to also contain a three-letter word, but it falls short
when we try to repeat the command on a word containing five letters.

Using a Normal Operator
-----------------------

The Visual mode `U` command has a Normal mode equivalent: `gU{motion}` (`:h
gU`). If we use this to make the first change, we can complete the subsequent
edits using the Dot Formula as shown in Table 5, _Normal Operator in Visual
Mode_, on page 45


Discussion
----------

Both of these techniques require only four keystrokes: `vitU` versus `gUit`,
but the underlying semantics are quite different. In the Visual mode approach,
the four keystrokes can be considered as two separate commands: `vit` to make a
selection and `U` to transform the selection. In contrast, `gUit` can be
considered as a single command comprised of an operator (`gU`) and a motion
(`it`).

If we want to set up the dot command so that it repeats something useful, then
we're better off staying out of Visual mode. As a general rule, we should
prefer operator commands over their Visual mode equivalents when working
through a repetitive set of changes.

That's not to say that Visual mode is out of bounds. It still has a place. Not
every editing task needs to be repeated, so Visual mode is perfectly adequate
for one-off changes. And even though Vim's motions allow for surgical
precision, sometimes we need to modify a range of text whose structure is
difficult to trace. In these cases, Visual mode is the right tool for the job.
