Tip 24: Edit Tabular Data with Visual-Block Mode
================================================

_We can work with rows of text in any editor, but manipulating columns of text
requires a more specialized tool. Vim provides this capability in the form of
its Visual-Block mode, which we'll use to transform a plain-text table._


Suppose that we have a plain-text table such as this one:

```
visual_mode/chapter-table.txt
------------------------------
Chapter                      Page
Normal mode                    15
Insert mode                    31
Visual mode                    44
```

We want to draw a vertical line out of pipe characters to separate the two
columns of text and make it look more like a table. But first, we'll reduce the
spacing between the two columns, which are farther apart than they need be. We
can make both of these changes using Visual-Block mode. See how in Table 6,
_Adding vertical pipes between columns_, on page 46.

To begin, we use `<C-v>` to engage Visual-Block mode; then we define the column
selection by moving our cursor down several lines. Pressing the `x` key deletes
that column, and the dot command repeats the deletion for the same range of
text. We repeat until the two columns are about the right distance apart.

Instead of using the dot command, we could have expanded our column selection
into a box by moving the cursor two or three steps to the right. Then feedback
that we get when we delete a single column and repeat it.

Now that we've lined up the two columns of text where we want them, we're ready
to draw a line between them. We can reselect out last visual selection using
the `gv` command and then press `r|` to replace each character in the selection
with a pipe character.

While we're at it, we may as well draw a horizontal line to separate the table
headers from the row beneath. We do a quick line-wise yank-and-put to duplicate
the top line (`yyp`) and then replace every character in that line with a dash
character (`Vr-`).

