Tip 26: Append After a Ragged Visual-Block
==========================================

_Visual-Block mode is great for operating on rectangular chunks of code such as lines and columns, but it's not confined to rectangular regions of text._

We've already met this snippet of JavaScript:

```js
// the_vim_way/2_foo_bar.js
var foo = 1
var bar = 'a'
var foobar = foo + bar
```

Three consecutive lines, each of different length. We want to append a semicolon at the end of each. In Tip 2, on page 4, we solved this problem using the dot command, but we could just as well use Visual-Block mode, table 8, _Appending a Semicolon to Multiple Lines in Visual-Block Mode_, on page 49 shows how.

Agter engaging Visual-Block mode, we extend our selection to the end of each line by pressing `$`. At first glance, one might expect this to cause difficulty because each line is a different length. But in this context, Vim understands that we want to extend our selection to the end of all selected lines. This lets us break free from our rectangular constraints, creating a selected that traces the ragged right edge of our text.

Having defined or selected, we can append at the end of each line using the `A` command (see _Vim's Conventions for "i" and "a" Keys_, on page 49). This drops us into Insert Mode on the topmost line of our selection. Anything that we type will appear on this line only for the duration of Insert Mode, but as soon as we revert to Normal Mode, our changes are propagated across the rest of the lines that we selected.

Vim's Conventions for "i" and "a" Keys
--------------------------------------

Vim has a couple of conventions for switching from Normal to Insert Mode. The `i` and `a` commands both do it, positioning the cursor in front of or after the current _character_, respectively. The `I` and `A` commands behave similarly, except that thye position the cursor at the start or end of the current _line_.

Vim follows similar conventions for switching from Visual-Block to Insert Mode. The `I` and `A` commands both to it, placing the cursor at start or end of the _selection_, respectively. So what about the `i` and `a` commands; what do they do in Visual mode?

In Visual and Operator-Pending modes the `i` and `a` keys follow a different convention: they form the first half of a _text object_. These are convened in a greater depth in Tip 51, on page 120. If you've made a selection with Visual-Block mode and you wonder why you're not in Insert Mode after pressing `i`, try using `I` instead.


