Tip 25 Change Columns of Text
=============================

_We can use Visual Block mode to insert text into several lines of text simulateously._

Visual-Block mode is not just useful to us when working with tabular data. Oftentimes, we can benefit from this feature when working with code. For example, take this snippet of (suboptimal) CSS:

```css
// visual_mode/sprite.css
li.one   a{ background-image: url('/images/sprite.png'); }
li.two   a{ background-image: url('/images/sprite.png'); }
li.three a{ background-image: url('/images/sprite.png'); }
```

Suppose that the `sprite.png` file has been moved from `images/` into a `components/` directory. We'll need to change each of these lines to reference the file's new location. We could do this using Visual-Block mode as shown in Table 7, _Inserting into Multiple Lines_, on page page 48.

The procedure should look pretty familiar. We begin by defining the selection that we want to operate on, which happens to be a rectangular Visual-Block. When we hit the `c` key, all of the selected text disappears and we are dropped in to Insert mode.

As we type the word "components" in Insert mode, it appears on the topmost line only. Nothing happens to the two lines below. We see the text that we typed in those lines only when we press `<ESC>` to return to Normal Mode.

The behavior of Vim's Visual-Block change command may be a little surprising. It seems inconsistent that the deletion should affect all marked lines simulateously, but the insertion affects only the topmost line (at least for the duration of Insert Mode). Some text eidtors provide similar functionality, but they update all the selected lines at the same time. If you're used to that kind of behavior (as I was), then you might find Vim's implementation less polished.

But in practice, it makes no different in the final outcome. So long as you dip into Insert Mode only for short bursts, you shouldn't have any surprises.
