Acknowledgments
---------------

Thanks to Bram Moolenaar for creating Vim and to all those whose have
contributed to its development. It's a timeless piece of software, and I look
forward to growing with it.

Thanks to everyone at the Pragmatic Bookshelf for working together to make this
book the best that it could be. Special thanks to Kay Keppler, my developmental
editor, for coaching me as a writer and for helping to shape this book, despite
its growing pains and my occasional tantrums. I'd also like to thanks David
Kelly for his adept handling of my unusual formatting requests.

_Practical Vim_ didn't start out as a recipe book, but Susannah Pfalzer
recognized that it would work best in this format. It was painful to have to
rewrite so much, but in doing so I produced a draft that I was happy with for
the first time. Susannah knows what's best, and I thank her for sharing that
insight.

Thanks to Dave Thomas and Andy Hunt for creating the Pragmatic Bookshelf. I
wouldn't want to be represented by any other publisher, and I'm honored to be
listed alongside the other titles in their catalog.

_Practical Vim_ wouldn't have been possible without my technical reviewers.
Eash of you contributed something and helped to shape the book. I'd like to
thank Adam McCrea, Alan Gardner, Alex Khan, Ali Alwastiy, Anders Janmyr, Andrew
Donaldsono, Angus Neil, Charlie Tanksley, Ches Martin, Daniel Bretoi, David
Morris, Denis Gorin, Elyézer Men des Rezende, Erik St. Martin, Federico
Galassi, Felix Geisendörder, Florian Vallen, Graeme Mathieson, Hans Hasselberg,
Henrik Nyth, Javier Collado, Jeff Holland, Josh Sullivan, Joshua Shoutherden,
Mislav Marohnic, Mitch Guthrie, Morgan Prior, Paul Barry, Peter Aronoff, Peter
Rihn, Philip Roberts, Robert Evans, Ryan Stenhouse, Steven! Ragnorök, Tibor
Simuc, Tim Chase, Tim Pope, Tim Tyrrell, and Tobias Sailer.

As a whole, I'd like to thank the Vim community for sharing their insights
across the Internet. I learned many of the tips in this book by reading the Vim
tag on StackOverflow and by following the vim_use mailing list.

Tim Pope's rails.Vim plugin was instrumental in convincing me to take Vim
seriously, and many of his other plugins have become essential parts of my
setup. I've also gained insight by using of Kana Natsuno, whose custom text
object are some of the best extensions to Vim's core functionality that I've
come across. Thank you to both for sharpening the saw so that the rest of us
can benefit.
