Foreword
========

Conventional wisdom dictates that vim has a steep learning curve. I think most
Vim users would disagree. Sure, there's an initial hump, but once you run
through _vimtutor_ and learn the basics of what to put in your `vimrc`, you
reach the point where you can actually get work done - a sort of hobbled
productivity.

What comes next? The Internet's answer to this is the "tip" - a recipe for
solving a specific problem. You might search for specific tips when your
current solution to a problem feels suboptimal, or you might proactively read
some of the more popular tips. This strategy works -  it's how I learned, after
all - but it's slow. Learning that `*` searches for the word under the cursor
is helpful, but it hardly helps you think like a vim master.

You can understand my skepticism, then, when I found out _Practical Vim_ was
using a tips format. How could a couple of hundred tips accomplish what took me
thousands? A few pages in I realized my definition of "tip" was narrow-minded.
In contrast to the problem/solution pattern I had expected, _Practical Vim_
teach lessons in thinking like a proficient Vim user. In a sense, they are more
like parables than recipes. The first few tips are lessons about the wide
applicability of the `.` command. This is a staple of any proficient Vim user's
repertoire, yet without guidance it was years before I came to realize this on
my own.

It is for this reason that I am excited about the publication of _Practical
Vim_. Because now when Vim novices ask me what's the next step, I know what to
tell them. After all, _Practical Vim_ even taught me a few things.

**Tim Pope**
Vim core contributor
April 2012


