Tip 10: Use Count to Do Simple Arithmetic
=========================================

_Most Normal mode commands can be executed with a count. We can exploit this
feature to do simple arithmetic._

Many of the commands that are available in Normal mode can be prefixed with
a count. Instead of executing the command just once. Vim will attempt to
execute the command the specified number of times (see `:h count`).

The `<c-a>` and `<c-x>` commands perform addition and subtraction on numbers.
When run without a count they increment by one, but if we prefix a number, then
we can add or subtract by any whole number. For example, if we positioned our
cursor one `5` character, running `10<c-a>` would modify it to read `15`.

But what happens if the cursor is not positioned on a numeric digit? The
documentation says that the `<c-a>` command will "add [count] to the number _at
or after the cursor_ (see `:h ctrl-a`). So if the cursor is not already
positioned on a number, then the `<c-a>` command will look ahead for a digit on
the current line. If it finds one, it jumps straight to it. We can use this to
our advantage.

Here's a snippet of CSS:


```
normal_mode/sprite.css
.blog, .news { background-image: url(/sprite.png); }
.blog, { background-position: 0px 0px }

```

We're going to duplicate the last line and make two small modifications to it:
replace the word "blog" with "news," and change "0px" to "-180px." We can
duplicate the line by running `yyp` and then using `cw` to change the first
word. But how should we deal with that number?

One approach would be to jump to the digit with `f0` and then dip into Insert
mode to change the value by hand: `i-18<esc>`. But it's quicker just to run
`180<c-x>`. Since our cursor isn't on a digit to begin with, it jumps forward
to the first one that it finds. That saves us the step of moving the cursor by
hand. Let's see this work flow in action:


Keystrokes          |     Buffer Contents
--------------------|---------------------------------------------------------
`{start}`           |     .blog, .news { background-image: url(/sprite.png); }
                    |     `.`blog, { background-position: 0px 0px }
--------------------|---------------------------------------------------------
`yyp`               |     .blog, .news { background-image: url(/sprite.png); }
                    |     .blog, { background-position: 0px 0px }
                    |     `.`blog, { background-position: 0px 0px }
--------------------|---------------------------------------------------------
`cW`.news<esc>      |     .blog, .news { background-image: url(/sprite.png); }
                    |     .blog, { background-position: 0px 0px }
                    |     .new`s`, { background-position: 0px 0px }
--------------------|---------------------------------------------------------
`180<c-x>`          |     .blog, .news { background-image: url(/sprite.png); }
                    |     .blog, { background-position: 0px 0px }
                    |     .new`s`, { background-position: -18`0`px 0px }
--------------------|---------------------------------------------------------

In this example, we've only duplicated the line once and made changes. But
suppose we had to make ten copies, subtracting 180 from the number in each
successive copy. If we were to switch to Insert mode to amend each number, we'd
have to type something different each time (`-180`, then `-360`, and so on).
But by using `180<c-x>` command, our work flow is identical for each successive
line. We could even record our keystrokes as a macros (see Chapter 11. Macros
on page 157) and then play it back as many times as needed.

> Number Formats
>---------------
>What follows `007`? No, this isn't a James Bond gag; I'm asking what result
>would you expect if you added one to `007`.
>
>If you answered `008`, then you might be in for a surprise when you try using
>Vim's `<c-a>`command on any number with a leading zero. As is the convention
>in some programming languages, Vim interprets numerals with a leading zero to
>be in octal notation rather than in decimal. In the octal numeric system, `007
>+1 == 010`, which looks like the decimal ten but is actually an octal eight.
>Confused?
>
>If you work with octal numbers frequently, Vim's default behavior might suit
>you. If you don't, you probably want to add the following line to your
>`vimrc`.
> ``` set arformats= ```
>
>This all cause Vim treat all numerals as decimal, regardless of whether they
>are padded with zeros.
