Tip 8: Chunk Your Undos
=======================

_In other text editors, invoking the undo command after typing a few words
might revert the last typed or character. However, in Vim we can contorl the
granularity of the undo command._

The `u` key triggers the undo command, which reverts the most recent change. A
change could be anything that modifies the text in the document. That includes
commands triggered from Normal, Visual, and Command-Line modes, but a change
could also encompass any text entered (or deleted) in Insert mode. So we could
also say that `i{insert some text}<Esc>` constitutes a change.

In nonmodal text editors, triggering the undo command after typing a few words
could do one of two things. It could undo the last character that was typed.
Or, more helpfully, it could chunk a set of characters together so that each
undo operation removed a word instead of a character.

In Vim, we can control the granularity of the undo command. From the moment we
enter Insert mode until we return to Normal mode, everything we type (or
delete) counts as a single change. So we can make the undo command operate on
words, sentences, or paragraphs just by moderating our use of the `<Esc>` key.

So how often should you leave Insert mode? It's a matter of preference, but I
like to make each "undoable chunk" correspond to a thought. As I write this
text (in Vim, of course!), I often pause at the end of a sentence to consider
what I'll write next. No matter how brief its duration, each pause forms a
natural break point, giving me a cue to leave Insert mode. When I'm ready to
continue writing, I press `A` and carry on where I left off.

If I decide that I've taken a wrong turn, I'll switch to Normal mode and press
`u`. Each time I undo, my text decomposes in coherent chunks that correspond to
my thought process as I was writing the original text. It means that I can
easily try out a sentence or two and then throw them away with a couple of
keystrokes.

If I'm in Insert mode with my cursor at the end of a line, the quickest way to
open a  new line is to press `<CR>`. And yet I sometimes prefer to press `<Esc>o`
just because I anticipate that I might want that extra granularity from the
undo command. If this sounds hard core, don't worry. As you become adept with
Vim, switching modes feels more and more lightweight.

As a general rule, it you've paused for long enough to ask the question, "Should
I leave Insert mode?" then do it.


> Moving Around in Insert Mode Resets the Change
> ----------------------------------------------
>
> When I said the undo command would revert all characters entered (or deleted)
> during a trip into Insert mode and back, I was glossing over a small detail.
> If we use the `<Up>`, `<Down>`, `<Left>`, or `<Right>` cursor keys while in
> Insert mode, a few undo chunk is created. It's just as though we had switched
> back to Normal mode to move around with the `h`, `j`, `k` or `l` commands,
> except that we don't have to leave Insert mode. this also has implications on
> the operation of the dot command.
