Tip 4: Act,Repeat, Reverse
==========================

_When facing a repetitive task, we can achieve an optimal editing strategy by
making both the motion and the change repeatable. Vim has a knack for this. It
remembers our actions and keeps the most common ones within close reach so that
w can easily replay them. In this tip, we'll introduce each of the actions that
Vim can repeat and learn how to reverse them._


We've seen that the dot command repeats the last change. Since lots of
operations count as a change, the dot command proves to be versatile. But some
commands can be repeated by other means. For example, `@:` can be used to
repeat any Example command (as discussed in Tip 31, on page 63). Or we can
repeat the last `:substitude` command (which itself happens to be an Example
command as well) by pressing `&` (see Tip 92, on page 224).

If we know how to repeat our actions without having to spell them out every
single time. Then we can be more efficient. First we act; then we repeat.

But when so much can be achieved with so few keystrokes, we have to watch our
step. It's easy to get trigger-happy. Rapping out `j.j.j.` again and again
feels a bit like doing a drum roll. What happens if we accidentally hit the `j`
key twice in a row? Or worse, the `.` key?

Whenever Vim makes it easy to repeat an action or a motion, it always provides
some way of backing out in case we accidentally go too far. In the case of the
dot command, we can always hit the `u` key to undo the last change. If we
hit the `;` key too many times after using `f{char}` command, we'll miss our
mark. But we can back up again by pressing the `,` key, which repeats the last
`f{char}` search in the reverse direction (see Tip ;49, on page 114).

If always helps to know where the reverse gear is in case you accidentally go a
step too far. Table 1, _Repeatable Actions and How to Reverse Them_, on page 9,
summarizes Vim's repeatable commands along with their corresponding reverse
action. In most cases, the undo commands is the one that we reach for. No
wonders the `u` key on my keyboard is so worn out!


Intent                           | Act                     | Repeat | Reverse
--                               | --                      | --     | --
Make a change                    | `{edit}`                | `.`    | `u`
Scan line for next character     | `f{char}`/`t{char}`     | `;`    | `,`
Scan line for previous character | `F{char}`/`T{char}`     | `;`    | `,`
Scan document for next match     | `/pattern<CR>`          | `n`    | `N`
Scan document for previous match | `?pattern<CR>`          | `n`    | `N`
Perform substitution             | `:s/target/replacement` | `&`    | `u`
Execute a sequence of changes    | `qx{changes}q`          | `@x`   | `u`
