Tip 5: Find and Replace by Hand
===============================

_Vim has a `:substitute` command for find-and-replace tasks, but with this
alternative technique, we'll change the first occurrence by hand and then find
and replace every other match one by one. The dot command will save us from
labor, but we'll meet another nifty one-key command that makes jumping between
matches a snap._


In this excerpt, the word "content" appears on every line:

```
the_vim_way/1_copy_content.txt
------------------------------
...We're waiting for content before the site can go live...
...If you are content with, let's go ahead with it...
...We'll launch as soon as we have the content...
```

Suppose that we want to use the word "copy" (as in "copywriting") instead of
"content." easy enough, you might think; we can just use the substitute
command, like this:

```vim
:%s/content/copy/g
```

But wait a minute! If we run this command, then we're going to create the
phrase: "If copy are 'copy' with this," which is nonsense!

We've run into this problem because the word "content" has two meanings. One is
synonymous with "copy" (and pronounced _con_tent), the other with "happy"
(pronounced con_tent_). Technically, we're dealing with heteronyms (words that
are spelled the same but differ in both meaning and pronunciation), but that
doesn't really matter. The point is, we have to watch our step.

We can't just blindly replace every occurrence of "content" with "copy." We
have to eyeball one and answer "yay" or "nay" to the question, should this
occurrence be changed? The substitute command is up to the task, and we'll find
out how in Tip 89, on page 219. But right now, we'll explore an alternative
solution that fits with the theme of this chapter.


Be Lazy: Search Without Typing
------------------------------

You might have guessed by now that the dot command is my favorite single-key
Vim trigger. In second place is the `*` command. This executes a search for the
word under the cursor at that moment (see `:h *`).

We could search for the word "content" by pulling up the search prompt and
spelling out the word in full:

```vim
/content
```

Or we could simply place our cursor on the word and hit the `*` key. Consider
the following workflow:
...


We being with our cursor positioned on the word "content" and then use the `*`
command to search for it. Try it for yourself. Two things should happen: the
cursor will jump forward to the next match, and all occurrences will be
highlighted. If you don't see any highlighting, try running `:set hls` and then
refer to Tip 80, on page 201, for more detail.

Having executed a search for the word "content," we can now advance to the next
occurrence just by hitting the `n` key. In this case, pressing `*nn` would
cycle through all matches, taking us back to where we started.

Make the Change Repeatable
--------------------------

With our cursor positioned at the start of the "word," we are poised to change
it. This involves two steps: deleting the word "content" and then typing its
replacement. The `cw` command deletes to the end of the word and then drops us
into Insert mode, where we can spell out the word "copy". Vim records our
keystrokes until we leave Insert mode, so the full sequence `cwcopy>ESC>` is
considered to be a single change. Pressing the `.` command deletes to the end
of the current word and changes it to "copy."


All Together Now
----------------

We're all set! Each time we press the `n` key, our cursor advances to the next
occurrence of the word "content." And when we press the `.` key, it changes the
word under the cursor to "copy."

If we wanted to replace all occurrences, we could blindly hammer out `n.n.n.`
as many times as it took to complete all the changes (although in that case, we
might as well have use the `:%s/content/copy/g` command). But we need to watch
out for false matches. So after pressing `n`, we can examine the current match
and decide if it should be changed to "copy." If so, we trigger the `.` cm. If
not, we don't. Whatever our decision, we can then move on to the next
occurrence by pressing `n` again. Rinse and repeat until done.
