Tip 1: Meet the Dot Command
===========================

_The dot command lets us repeat the last change. It is the most powerful and
versatile command in Vim_


Vim's documentation simply states that the dot command "repeats the last
change" (see `:h .`). It doesn't sound like much, but in that simple definition
we'll find that kernel of what makes Vim's modal editing model so effective.
First we have to ask, "What is a change?"

To understand the power of the dot command, we have to realize that the "last
change" could be one of many things. A change could act at the level of
individual characters, entire lines, or even the whole file.

To demonstrate, we'll use this snippet of text:

```
the_vim_day/0_mechanics.txt
---------------------------
Line one
Line two
Line three
Line four
```

The `x` command deletes the character under the cursor. When we use the dot
command in this context, "repeat last change" tells Vim to delete the character
under the cursor:

Keystrokes   | Buffer Contents
------------ | ----------------
`{start}`    | Line one
             | Line two
             | Line three
             | Line four
------------------------
`x`          | ine one
             | Line two
             | Line three
             | Line four
------------------------
`.`          | ne one
             | Line two
             | Line three
             | Line four
------------------------
`..`         |  one
             | Line two
             | Line three
             | Line four


We can restore the file to its original state by pressing the `u` key a few
times to undo the changes.

The `dd` command also performs a deletion, but this one acts on the current
line as a whole. If we use the dot command after `dd`, then "repeat last
change" instructs  Vim to delete the current line:

Keystrokes   | Buffer Contents
------------ | ----------------
`{start}`    | Line one
             | Line two
             | Line three
             | Line four
------------------------
`dd`         | Line two
             | Line three
             | Line four
------------------------
`.`          | Line three
             | Line four

Finally, the `>G` command increases the indentation from the current line until
the end of the file. If we follow this command with the dot command, then
"repeat last change" tells Vim to increase the indentation level from the
current position to the end of the file. In this example, we'll start with the
cursor on the second line to highlight the difference.

The `x`, `dd`, and `>` commands are all executed from Normal mode, but we also
create a change each time we dip into Insert mode. From the moment we enter
Insert mode (by pressing `i`, for example) until we return to Normal mode (by
pressing `<ESC>`), Vim records every keystroke. After making a change such as
this, the dot command will replay our keystrokes (see _Moving Around in Insert
Mode Resets the Change_, on page 17, for a caveat).


The Dot Command is a Micro Macro
--------------------------------

Later, in Chapter 11, Macros, on page 157, we'll see that Vim can record any
arbitrary number of keystrokes to be played back later. This allows us to
capture our most repetitive work-flows and replay them at a keystroke. We can
think of the dot command as being a miniature macro, or a "micro" if you
prefer.

We'll see a few applications of the dot command throughout this chapter. We'll
also learn a couple of best practices for working with the dot command in Tip
9, on page 17, and Tip 23, on page 43.
