Tip 3: Take One Step Back, Then Three Forward
=============================================

_We can pad a single character with two spaces (one in front, the other behin)
by using an idiomatic Vim solution. At first it might look slightly odd, but
the solution has the benefit of being repeatable, whihc allows us to complete
the task effortlessly._


Suppose that we have a line of code that looks like this:

```js
// the_vim_way/3_concat.js
var foo = "method("+argument1+","+argument2+")";
```


Concatenating strings in JavaScript never looks pretty, but we could make this
a little easier on the eye by padding each + sign with spaces to make it look
like this:

```js
var foo = "method(" + argument1 + "," + argument2 + ")";
```


Make the Change Repeatable
--------------------------

This idiomatic approach solves the problem:
...


The `s` command compounds two steps into one: it deletes the character under
the cursor and then enters Insert mode. Having deleted the + sign, we then type
` + ` and leave the Insert mode.

One step back and then three steps forward. It's a strange little dance that
might seem unintuitive, but we get a big win by doing this way: we can repeat
the change with the dot command; all we need to do is position our cursor on
the next + symbol, and the dot command will repeat that little dance.


Make the Motion Repeatable
--------------------------

There's another trick in this example. The `f{char}` command tells Vim to look
ahead for the next occurrence of the specified character and then move the
cursor directly to it if a match is found (see `:h f`). So when we type `f+`,
our cursor goes straight to the next + symbol. We'll learn more about the
`f{char}` command in Tip 49, on page 114.

Having made our first change, we could jump to the next occurrence by repeating
the `f+` command, but there's a better way. The `;` command will repeat the
last search that the `f` command performed. So instead of typing `f+` four
times, we can use that command once and then follow up by using the `;` command
three times.


All Together Now
----------------

The `;` command takes us to our next target, and the `.` command repeats the
last change, so we can complete the changes by typing `;.` three times. Does
that look familiar?

Instead of fighting Vim's modal input model, we're working with it, and look
how much easier it makes this particular task.
