Tip 6: Meet the Dot Formula
===========================


_We're cosidered three simple editing tasks so far. Even though each problem
was different, we found a solution using the dot command for each one. In this
tip, we'll compare each solution and identify a comon pattern - an optimal
editing strategy that I call the Dot Formula._


Reviewing Three Dot-Command Editing Tasks
----------------------------------------

In Tip 2, on page 4, we wanted to append a semicolon at the end of a sequence
of lines. We changed the first line by invoking `A;<ESC>`, which set us up so
that we could use the dot command to repeat the change on each subsequent line.
We could move between lines using the `j`command, and the remaining changes
could be completed simply by pressing `j.` as many times as necessary.

In Tip 3, on page 6, we wanted to pad each occurrence of the + symbol with a
space both in front and behind. We used the `f+` command to jump to our target
and then the `s` command to substitute one character with three. That set us up
so that we could complete the task by pressing `;.` a few times.

In Tip 5, on page 9, we wanted to substitute every occurrence of the word
"content" with the word "copy." We used the `*` command to initiate a search
for the target word and then ran the `cw` command to change the first
occurrence.  This set us up so that the `n` key would take us to the next match
and the `.` key would apply the same change. We could complete the task simply
by pressing `n.` as many times as it took.


The Ideal: One Keystroke to Move, One Keystroke to Execute
----------------------------------------------------------

In all of these examples, using the dot command repeats the last change. But
that's not the only thing they share. A single keystroke is all that's required
to move the cursor to its next target.

We're using one keystroke to move and one keystroke to execute. It can't really
get any better than that, can it? It's an ideal solution. We'll see this
editing strategy coming up again and again, so for the sake of convenience,
we'll refer to this pattern as the Dot Formula.
