Tip 32: Tab-Complete Your Ex Commands
=====================================

_Just like in the shell, we can use the `<Tab>` key to atocomplete commands at
the prompt._

Vim is smart about picking suggestions for tab-completion. It looks at the
context of what has already been typed at the command like and builds list of
suitable suggestions. For example, we could type this:

```
:col<C-d>
```

The `<C-d>` command asks Vim to reveal a list of possible completions (see `:h
c_CTRL-D`). If we hit the `<Tab>` key, the prompt will cycle through `colder`,
`coloscheme`, and then the original `col` again. We can scroll backward through
the suggestions by pressing `<S-Tab>`.

Suppose we want to change the color scheme, but we can't remember the name of
the theme we want. We could use the `<C-d>` command to show all the options:

```
:colorscheme <C-d>
```

This time, `<c-d>` shows a list of suggestions based on the color schemes that
are available. If we want to enable the solarized theme, we could just type
the letters "so" and then hit the Tab key to complete our command.

In many scenarios, Vim's tab-completion does the right thing. If we type
a command that expects a filepath as an argument (such as `:edit` or `:write`),
then `<Tab>` will complete directories and filenames relative to the current
working directory. With the `:tag` command we can autocomplete tag names. The
`:set` and `:help` commands know about every configuration opting in Vim.

We can even define the tab-completion behavior when creating our own custom Ex
commands. To see what's possible, check out `:h command-complete`.


Choosing from Multiple Matches
------------------------------

When Vim finds only a single suggestions for tab-completion, it uses the entire
match. But if Vim finds multiple suggestions, then one of several things could
happen. By default, Vim expands the first suggestion when the Tab key is
pressed for the first time. With each subsequent press of the Tab key, we can
scroll through the remaining suggestions.

We can customize this behavior by tweaking the `wildmode` option (see `:h
'wildmode'`). If you're used to working with the bash shell, then this setting
will match your expectations.

```
set wildmode=longest,list
```

If you're used to the autocomplete menu provided by zsh, you might want to try
this instead:

```
set wildmenu
set wildmode=full
```

With the `'wildmenu'` option enabled, Vim provides a navigable list of
suggestions. We can scroll forward through the items by pressing `<Tab>`,
`<C-n>`, or `<Right>`, and we can scroll backward through them with `<S-Tab>`,
`<C-p>` or `<Left>`.
