Tip 34: Recall Commands from History.
=====================================

_Vim records the commands that we enter in Command-Line mode and provides two
ways to recalling them: scrolling through past command-lines with the cursor
keys or dialing up the command-line window._

Vim keeps a history of our activity in Command-Line mode. We can easily recall
previous commands, so there's no need to type out a long Ex command at the
prompt more than once.

To begin with, let's switch to Command-Line mode by pressing `:` key. Leave the
prompt empty; then press the `<Up>` arrow key. The command line should be
populated with the most recent Ex command that we executed. We can use the
`<Up>` key again to go further back through our Ex command history or use the
`<Down>` key to go in the opposite direction.

Now try typing `:help`, followed by the `<Up>` key. Again, this should
scroll through previous Ex commands, but instead of showing everything, the
list will be filtered to only include Ex commands that started with the word
"help."

By default, Vim records the last twenty commands. With memory becoming ever
cheaper in today's computers, we can probably afford to up this limit by
changing the `history` option. Try adding this line to your `vimrc`:

```vim
set history=200
```
Note that history is not recorded just for the current editing session. It
persists even when we quit and relaunch Vim (see `:h viminfo`). Increasing the
number of items recorded in history can be really useful.

As well as recording a history of Ex commands. Vim keeps a separate record of
our search history. If we pres `/` to bring up the search prompt, we can also
scroll backward and forward through previous searches with the `<Up>` and
`<Down>` keys. The search prompt is, after all, just another form of
Command-Line mode.

Meet the Command-Line Window
----------------------------

Like Insert mode, Command-Line mode is find for composing something from
scratch, but it's not a comfortable place to edit text.

Suppose that we're working on a simple Ruby script. Each time we make a change,
we find ourselves running the following two commands:

```
:write
:!ruby %
```

After running these two commands in quick succession a couple of times,
we realize that we could streamline our work flow by folding into a single
command line. This way we can dial up one complete command from our history and
replay it.

```
:write | !ruby %
```

Each of these commands is already in our history, so we shouldn't have to type
the entire command line from scratch. But how can we merge two records from our
history into one? Press `q:` and meet the command-line window (see `:h cmdwin`).

The command-line window is like a regular Vim buffer, where each line contains
an item from our history. With the `k` and `j` keys, we cna move backward and
forward through our history. Or we can use Vim's search feature to find the
line that we're looking for. When we press the `<CR>` key, the contents of the
current line are executed as an Ex command.

The beauty of he command-line window is that it allows us to change historical
commands using the full modal editing power of Vim. We can navigate with any of
the motions we're accustomed to using in Normal mode. We can operate on visual
selections or switch to Insert mode. We can even run Ex commands on the
contents of the command-line window!


> Avoid the Cursor Keys When Recalling Commands from History
> ----------------------------------------------------------
>
> In addition to the `<Up>` and `<Down>` keys, we can also use the
> `<C-p>` and `<C-n>` chords to go backward and forward through our
> command history. The advantage of using these mappings is that we
> don't need to move our hands from the home row to use them. But
> there's a disadvantage to the `<C-p>` and `<C-n>` commands: unlike
> `<Up>` and `<Down>`, they don't filter the command history.
>
> We can get the best of both by creating the following custom mappings:
>
> ```
> cnoremap <C-p> <Up>
> cnoremap <C-n> <Down>
> ```

Having summoned the command-line window by pressing `q:`, we could solve our
problem as follows:

...

Pressing `<CR>` would then execute the `:update | !ruby %`  command as though
we had typed it into the command line.

When the command-line window is open, it always gets the focus. That means we
can't switch to other windows except by dismissing the command-line window. We
can close the command-line window by running the `:q` command (just like any
ordinary Vim widow) or by pressing `<CR>`

Note that when we press `<CR>` in the command-line window, the command is
executed in the context of the active window: that is, the window that was
active before the command-line window was summoned. Vim doesn't indicate which
is active window when the command-line window is open, so pay attention if
you're using split windows!

What if halfway through composing an Ex command at the prompt, we realize that
we need more editing power? In Command-Line mode, we can use the `<C-f>`
mapping to switch to the command-line window, preserving a copy of the command
that was typed at the prompt. This table summarizes a few of the methods for
summoning the command-line window:

Command | Action
--------|-------
`q/`    | Open the command-line window with history of searches
`q:`    | Open the command-line window with history of Ex commands
`<C-f>` | Switch form Command-Line mode to the command-line window.

It's easy to mix up the `q:` and `:q` commands. I'm sure that we've all opened
the command-line window by accident when we actually meant to quit Vim! It's
a shame, because this feature is really useful, but many people are frustrated
by their first (accident) encounter with it. Skip ahead to Tip 85, on page 209,
for another example of the command-line window in action.
