Tip 33: Insert the Current Word at the Command Promt
====================================================

_Even in the Command-Line mode, Vim always knows where the cursor is positioned
and which split window is active. To save time, we can insert the current word
(or WORD) from the active document onto our command promt_

At Vim's command line, the `<C-r><C-w>` mapping copies the word under the
cursor and inserts it at the command-line prompt. We can use this to save
ourselves a bit of typing.

Suppose that we want to rename the `tally` variable in this excerpt to
`counter`:

```js
//ex_mode/loop.js
var tally;
for (tally=1; tally <=10; tally++){
  // Do something with tally
}
```

With out cursor positioned on the word `tally`, we could use the `*` command to
search for each occurrence. (The `*` command is equivalent to typing the
sequence `/\<<C-r><C-w>\><CR>`. See Tip 76, on page 190, for a discussion of
how `\<` and `\>` items work in a pattern.)


When we press the `*` key, our cursor jumps forward to the next match, but the
cursor ends up on the same word anyway. Typing `cwcounter<ESC>` makes the
change.

We'll carry out the remaining changes using a `:substitute` command. Since our
cursor is on the word "counter," we don't need to type it out again. We can
just use the `<C-r><C-w>` mapping to populate the replacement field:

```
:%s//<C-r><C-w>/g
```

That command doesn't look very succinct when written down, but two keystrokes
to insert a word ain't bad. We didn't have to type the search pattern either,
thanks to the `*` command. Refer to Tip 90, on page 220, to see why we can
leave the search field blank like that.

While `<C-r><C-w>` gets the _word_ under the cursor, we can instead use
`<C-r><C-a>` if we want to get the _WORD_ (for an explanation, see Tip 48, on
page 112). See `:h c_CTRL-R_CTRL-W` for more details. We've used the
`:substitute` command in this example, but these mappings can be used with any
Ex command.

For another application, try opening your `vimrc` file, place your cursor on
a setting, and then type `:h <C-r><C-w>` to look up the documentation for that
setting.
