Tip 35: Run Commands in the Shell
=================================

_We can easily invoke external programs without leaving Vim. Best of
all, we can send the contents of a buffer as standard input to a command
or use the standard output from an external command to populate our
buffer._

The commands discussed in this tip work best when used from Vim inside
a terminal. If you're using GVim (or MacVim), then things may not work quite as
smoothly. That shouldn't come as a great surprise. It's much easier for Vim to
delegate work to the shell if Vim itself is already running inside a shell.
GVim does some things better, but this is one area where terminal Vim has the
edge.


Executing Programs in the Shell
-------------------------------

From Vim's Command-Line mode, we can invoke external programs in the shell by
prefixing them with a bang symbol (see `:h :!`). For example, if we want to
examine the contents of the current directory, we could run the following:

```
:!ls
```


Note the difference between `:!ls` and `:ls` - the former calls the `ls`
command in the shell, whereas `:ls` calls Vim's built-in command, which shows
the contents of the buffer list.

On Vim's command line, the `%` symbol is shorthand for the current file name
(see `:h cmdline-special`). We can exploit this to run external commands that
do something with the current line. For example, if we're working on a Ruby
file, we could execute it by running this:

```Vim
:!ruby %
```

Vim also provides a set of filename modifiers, which allow us to extract
information from he current filename, such as its path or extension (see `:h
filename-modifiers`). Skip ahead to Tip 44, on page 101, for an example of how
these can be used.

The `:!{cmd}` syntax is great for firing one-off commands, but what if we want
to run several commands in the shell? In that case, we can use Vim's `:shell`
command to start an interactive shell session (see `:h :shell`):

```Vim
:shell
$ pwd
```

The `exit` command kills the shell and returns us to Vim.


Putting Vim in the background
-----------------------------

The `:shell` command is a feature provided by Vim, which lets us switch to an
interactive shell. But if we're already running Vim in a terminal, then we also
have access to built-in shell commands. For example, the bash shell supports
job control, which allows us to suspend a job by putting it into the background
and then lets us resume it later by bringing it back into the foreground.

Suppose that we're running Vim inside a bash shell and we want to execute
a series of shell commands. Pressing `Ctrl-z` suspends the process that's
running Vim and returns control to bash. The Vim process sits idle in the
background, allowing us to interact with our bash session as normal. We can
inspect the list of jobs by running this command:

```bash
$ jobs
```
In bash, we can use the `fg` command to resume a suspended job, bringing it
back into the foreground.. That brings Vim back to life exactly as we left it.
The `Ctrl-z` and `fg` commands are quicker and easier to use than Vim's
equivalent `:shell` and `exit` commands. For more information, run `man bash`
and read the session on job control.


Using the Contents of a Buffer for Standard Input or Output
-----------------------------------------------------------

When we use the `:!{cmd}` syntax, Vim echoes output from the `{cmd}`. This
works fine if the command produces little or no output, but it's not very
helpful if the command produces many lines of output. As an alternative, we can
use the `:read !{cmd}` command, which puts the output from the `{cmd}` into our
current buffer (see `:h read!`).


The `:read !{cmd}` command lets us direct standard output into a buffer. As you
might expect, the `:rite !{cmd}` does the inverse: it uses the contents of the
buffer as standard input for the specified `{cmd}` (see `:h write_c`). Skip
ahead to Tip 45, on page 102, to see an example of this feature in use.

The bang symbol can take on different meanings depending on where it is placed
within the command line. Compare these commands:

```
:write !sh
:write ! sh
:write! sh
```

The first two commands pass the contents of the buffer as standard input to the
external `sh` command. The last command writes the contents of the buffer to
a file called `sh` by calling the `:write!` command. In this case, the bang
tells Vim to overwrite any existing `sh` file. As you can see, the placement of
the bang symbol can drastically alter the outcome. Take care when composing
this sort of command!

The effect of the `:write !sh` command is that each line of the current buffer
is executed in the shell. Refer to `:h rename-files` for a nice example of this
command in use.


Filtering the Contents of a Buffer Through an External Command
--------------------------------------------------------------

The `:!{cmd}` command takes on a different meaning when it's given a range. The
lines specified by `[range]` are passed as standard input for the `{cmd}`, and
then the output from `{cmd}` ovrewrites the original contents of `[range]`. Or
to put it another way, the `[range]` is filtered through the specified `{cmd}`
(see `:h :range!`). Vim defines a filter as "a program that accepts text as
standard input, changes it some way, and sends it to the standard output."

As a demonstration, let's use the external `sort` command to rearrange the
record in this CSV file:

```
first name, last name, email
john,smith,drew@vimcasts.org
jane,doe,jane@example.com
```

We'll sort the records by he second field: last name. We can use the `-t`
option to tell the `sort` command that fields are separated with commas, and we
can use the `-k2` flag to indicate that the second field is the be used for the
sort.

The first line of the file contains header information. We want to leave it at
the top of the file, so we'll exclude it from the sort operation by using
a rnage of `:2,$`. This command line does what we want:

```
:2,$!sort -t',' -k2
```

The records in our CSV file should now be sorted by the last name:

```
first name,last name,email
jane,doe,jane@example.com
john,smith,drew@vimcasts.org
```

Vim provides a convenient shortcut for setting the range of
a `:[range]!{filter}` command such as this. The `!{motion}` operator command
drops us into Command-Line mode and prepopulates the `[range]` with the lines
covered by the specified `{motion}` (see `:h!`). For example, if we place our
cursor on line 2 and then invoke `!G`, Vim opens a prompt with the `:.,$!`
range set up for us. We still have to type out the rest of the `{filter}`
command, but it saves a little work.


Discussion
----------

When operating Vim, we're never more than a couple of keystrokes away from the
shell. This table summarizes a selection of the most useful methods for calling
external commands:

Command                | Effect
--------               | -------
`:shell`               | start a shell (return to Vim by typing `e:xit`)
`:!{cmd}`              | Execute `{cmd}` with the shell
`read !{cmd}`          | Execute `{cmd}` in the shell and insert its standard output below the cursor
`:[range]write !{cmd}` | Execute `{cmd}` in the shell with `[range]` lines as standard input.
`:[range]!{filter}`    | Filter the specified `[range]` through external program `{filter}`


Vim gives special treatment to the some commands. For example, both `make` and
`grep` have wrapper commands. Not only are they easy to execute from he inside
Vim, but their output is parsed and used to populate the quickfix list. These
commands are covered in the greater depth in both Chapter 17, _Compile Code and
Navigate Errors with the Quickfix List_, on page 259, and Chapter 18, _Search
Project-Wide with grep, vimgrep, and Others_, on page 269.


