Tip 28: Execute a Command on One or More Consecutive Lines
==========================================================

_Many Ex commands can be given a [range] of lines to act upon. We can
specify the start and end of a range with either a line number, a mark,
or a pattern._

One of strengths of Ex commands is that they can be executed across a
range of lines. We'll use this short excerpt of HTML as an example:

```html
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
  <head><title>Practical Vim</title></head>
  <body><h1>Practical Vim</h1></body>
</html>
```

To demonstrate, we'll use the `:print` command, which simply echoes the
specified lines below Vim's command line. This command doesn't perform any useful work, but it helps to illustrate which lines make up a range.
Try replacing `:print` in each of the following examples with a command
such as `:delete`, `:join`, `:substitude`, or `:normal`, and you should
get a feel for how useful Ex commands can be.


Use Line Numbers As an Address
------------------------------

If we enter an Ex command consisting only of a number, then Vim will
interpret that as an address and move our cursor to the specified line.
We can jump to the top of the file by running the following:

```
:1
:print
```

This file contains only file lines. If we wanted to jump to the end of
the file, we could enter `:5` or we could use the special `$` symbol:

```
:$
:p
```

Here we've used `:p`, which is the abbreviated form of `:print`. Instead
of splitting up the two commands, we could roll them into a single
incantation:

```
:3p
```

That moves the cursor to line 3 and then echoes the contents of that
line. Remember, we're just using the `:p` command for illustrate purpose
here. If we had issued the command `:3d`, then we would have jumped
to line 3 and deleted it in a single move. The equivalent Normal mode
commands would be `3G` followed by `dd`. So this is one example where an
Ex command can be quicker than a Normal mode command.


Specify a Range of Lines by Address
-----------------------------------

So far, we've specified addresses as a single line number. But we can also
specify a range of lines. Here's an example:

```
:2,5p
```

That prints each line from 2 to 5, inclusive. Note that after running this
command, the cursor would be left positioned on line 5. In general, we could
say that a range takes this form.

```
:{start},{end}
```

Note that both the `{start}` and `{end}` are addresses. So far, we've
looked at using line numbers for addresses, but we'll soon see that
using a pattern or a mark is also possible.

We can use the `.` symbol as an addresses to represent that current line. So,
we can easily compose a range representing everything from here to the end of
the file:

```
:2
:.,$p
```

The `%` symbol also has a special meaning - it stands for all the lines in the
current file:

```
:%p
```

This is equivalent to running `:1,$p`. Using this shorthand in combination with
the `:substitude` command is very common.

```
:%s/Practical/Pragmatic/
```

This command tells Vim to replace the first occurrence of "Practical" with
"Pragmatic" on each line. We'll learn more about this command in Chapter 14,
_Subtitution_, on page 215.


Specify a Range of Lines by Visual Selection
--------------------------------------------

Instead of addressing a range of lines by number, we could just make a visual
selection. If we ran the command `2G` followed by `VG`, we would make a visual
selection that looks like this:

```
...
```

If we press the `:` key now, the command-line prompt will be prepopulated with
the range `:'<,'>`. It looks cryptic, but you can think of it simply as a range
standing for the visual selection. Then we can specify our Ex command, and it
will execute on every selected line:

```
:'<,'>p
```

This range can be really handy if we want to run a `:substitude` command on
a subset of the file.

The `'<` symbol is a mark standing for the first line of the visual selection,
while the `'>` stands for the last line of the visual selection (see Tip 53, on
page 126, for more about marks). These marks persist even when we leave Visual
mode. If you try running `:'<,'>p` straight from Normal mode, it will always
act on the lines that most recently formed a Visual mode selection.


Specify a Range of Lines by Patterns
------------------------------------

Vim also accepts a pattern as an address for an Ex command, such as the one
shown here:

```
:/<html>/,/<\/html>/p
```

This looks quite complex, but it follows the usual form for a range:
`:{start},{end}`. The `{start}` address in this case is the pattern `/<html>/`,
while the `{end}` address is `/<\/htlm>/`. In other words, the range begins on
the line containing an opening `<html>` tag and ends on the line containing the
corresponding closing tag.

In this particular case, we could achieve the same result using the address
`:2,5`, which is shorter but more brittle. If we use patterns to specify the
range, then our command will always operate on the entire `<html></html>`
element, no matter how many lines it comprises.


Modify an Address Using an Offset
---------------------------------

Suppose that we want to run an Ex command on every line inside the
`<html></html>` block but not on the lines that contain the `<html>` and
`</html>` tags themselves. We could do so using an offset:

```
:/<html>/+1,/<\html>/-1p
```

The general form for an offset goes like this:

```
:{address}+n
```

If n is omitted, it defaults to 1. The `{address}` could be a line number,
a mark, or a pattern.

Suppose that we wanted to execute a command on a particular number of lines,
starting with a current line. We could use an offset relative to the current
line:

```
:2
:.,.+3p
```

The `.` symbol stands for the current line, so `:.,.+3` is equivalent to `:2,5`
in this case.


Discussion
----------

The syntax for defining a range is very flexible. We can mix and match line
numbers, marks, and patterns, and we can apply an offset to any of them. This
table summarizes a few of the symbols that can be used to create addresses and
ranges for Ex commands.

Symbol  | Address
------- | --------
`1`     | First line of the file
`$`     | Last line of the file
`0`     | Virtual line above first line of the file
`.`     | Line where the cursor is placed
`'m`    | Line containing mark `m`
`'<`    | Start of visual selection
`'>`    | End of visual selection
`%`     | The entire file (shorthand for `:1,$`)

Line 0 doesn't really exist, but it can be useful as an address in certain
contexts. In particular, it can be used as the final argument in the `:copy
{address}` and `:move {address}` commands when we want to copy or move a range
of lines to the top of a file.  We'll see examples of these commands in he next
two tips.

When we specify a `[range]`, it always represents a set of contiguous lines.
It's also possible to execute an Ex command on a set of noncontiguous lines
using the `:global` command. We'll learn more about that in Chapter 15, _Global
Commands_, on page 237.

