Tip 15: Paste from a Register Without Leaving Insert Mode
=========================================================

_Vim's yank and put operations are usually executed from Normal mode, but
smoetimes we might want to paste text into the document without leaving Insert
mode._

Here's an unfinished excerpt of text:

```
insert_mode/practical-vim.txt
-----------------------------
Practical Vim, by Drew Neil
Read Drew Neil's
```

> Remap the Caps Lock Key
> -----------------------
>
> For Vim users, the Caps Lock key is a menace. If Caps Lock is engaged and you
> try using the `k` and `j` keys to move the cursor around, you'll instead
> trigger the `K` and `J` commands. Briefly: `K` looks up the man page for the
> word under the cursor (`:h K`), and `J` joins the current and next lines
> together (`:h J`). It's surprising how quickly you can mangle the text in
> your buffer by accidentally enabling the Caps Lock key!
>
> Many Vim users remap the Caps Lock button to make it act like another key,
> such as `<Esc>` or `<Ctrl>`. On modern keyboards, the `<Esc>` key is
> difficult to reach, whereas the Caps Lock is handy. Mapping Caps Lock to
> behave as an `<Esc>` key can save a lot of effort, especially since the
> `<Esc>` key is so heavily used in Vim. I prefer to map the Caps Lock button
> to behave instead as a `<Ctrl>` key. The `<C-[>` mapping is synonymous with
> `<Esc>`, and it's easier to type when the `<Ctrl>` key is within easy reach.
> Additionally, the `<Ctrl>` key can be used for many other mappings, both in
> Vim and in other programs too.
>
> The simplest way to remap the Caps Lock key is to do it at the system level.
> The methods differ on OS X, Linux, and Windows, so rather than reproducing
> instructions here for each system, I suggest that you consult Google. Note
> that this customization won't' just affect Vim: it applies system -wide. If
> you take my advice, you'll throw away the Caps Lock key forever. You won't
> miss it, I promise.


We want to complete the last line by inserting the title of this book. Since
that text is already present at the start of the first line, we'll yank it into
a register and then append the text at the end of the next line in Insert mode.


Keystrokes  | Buffer Contents
----------- | ----------------
`yts,`      | Practical Vim, by Drew Neil
            | Read Drew Neil's
`jA␣`       | Practical Vim, by Drew Neil
            | Read Drew Neil's
`<C-r>0`    | Practical Vim, by Drew Neil
            | Read Drew Neil's Practical Vim
`<Esc>`     | Practical Vim, by Drew Neil
            | Read Drew Neil's Practical Vim


The command `yt,` yansk the word _Practical Vim_ into the yank register (we'll
meet the `t{char}` motion in Tip 49, on page 114). In Insert mode, we can press
`<C-r>0` to paste the text that we just yanked at the current cursor position.
We'll discuss registers and the yank operation at greater length in Chater 10,
_Copy and Paste_, on page 141.

The general format of the command is `<C-r>{register}`, where `{register}` is
the address of the register we want to insert (see `:h i_CTRL-R`).


Use `<C-r>{register}` for Character-wise Registers
--------------------------------------------------

The `<C-r>{register}` command is convenient for psting a few words from Insert
mode. If the register contains a lot of text, you might notice a slight delay
before the screen updates. That's because Vim inserts the text from the
register as if it were being typed one character at a time. If the `textwidth`
or `autoindent` options are enabled, you might end up with unwanted line breaks
or extra indentation.

The `<C-r><C-p>{register}` command is smarter. It inserts text literally and
fixes any unintended indentation (see `:h i_CTRL-R_CTRL-P`). But it's a bit of
a handful1! If I want to paste a register containing multiple lines of text, I
prefer toswitch to Normal mode and use one of the put commands (see Tip 62, on
page 151).
