# Chapter 1: Introduction #

> "I'm using Linux. A library that Emacs uses to communicate Intel
> hardware." - Erwin, #Emacs, Freenode

## Thank You ##

Thank you for purchasing *Mastering Emacs*. This book has been a long
time coming. When I started my blog, Mastering Emacs, in 2010, it was
at the recommendation of a good friend, Lee, who suggested that I
share my thoughts on Emacs and work flow in Emacs. At the time I had
accrued in an org mode file titled *blogideas.org* a large but random
assortment of ideas and concepts that I'd learned about and wished
someone had taught me. The end result of that file is the blog and now
this book.

**Special Thanks**
> ... (kept, too bored to type)

Like a lot of people, I was thrust into the world of Emacs without
knowing anything about it; in my case it was in m first year of
University where the local computer society was made up primarily
of Vim users. It was explained to me, in no uncertain terms, that "You
use Vim -- that's it." Not wanting to be told what to do, I picked the
polar opposite of Vim and went with Emacs.

Emacs proved to be a stable and reliable editor in all those years,
but it was a tough one to get to know. Despite the extensive user
documentation, it never helped me to learn and understand Emacs.

As it turns out, Emacs is a philosophy or even a religion. So, the
joke about the "Church of Emacs" is eerily accurate in many ways, as
you will find out in the next chapter.


## Intended Audience ##

It's a bit weird talking about the intended audience when you've
already bought the book on the subject. But it bears mentioning anyway
so no matter your Emacs skill level you will get something out of this
book.

The first and (most obvious) audience are people new to Emacs. If
you've never used Emacs before in your life, you will hopefully find
this book very useful. However, if you're new to Emacs _and_
non-technical, then you're going to have a hard time. Emacs, despite
being suitable for much more than just programming, is squarely aimed
at computer-savvy people. Although it's perfectly possible to use
Emacs anyway, this book will assume that you're technically inclined,
but not necessarily a programmer.

If you're tried Emacs before but given up, then I hope this book is
what convinces you to stick with it. But it's fine if you don't; some
languages or environments don't (contrary to what a lot of Emacs users
would claim) work well with Emacs. If you're primarily a Microsoft
Windows developer working with Visual Studio, using Emacs is going to
be a case of two steps forward, one step back: you gain unprecedented
text editing and tool integration but lose all the benefits a unified
IDE would give you.

If you're a Vim refugee, the welcome to the dark side! if your primary
objective is to use Emacs's Vim emulation layers, then some of this
book is redundant; it concerns itself with the default Emacs bindings
and it teaches "the Emacs way" of doing things. But not to worry: a
lot of the tips and advice herein are still applicable, and who knows -
maybe you'll switch away from Evil mode in time.

And finally, if you're an existing Emacs user but struggling to take
it to the next level, or maybe you just need a refresher course "from
the ground up," then this book is also for you.


## What you'll learn ##

Covering _all_ of Emacs in just one book would be a Sisyphean
task. Instead, I aim to teach you what you need to be productive in
Emacs, which is just a small subset of Emacs's capability. Hopefully,
by the end of this book, and with practice, you will know enough about
Emacs to seek out and answer questions you have about the editor.

To be more specific, I will teach you, in broad terms, six things:

**What Emacs is about** A thorough explanation of important
  terminology and conventions that Emacs uses which in many case
  differs greatly from other editors. You will also learn the
  philosophy. I will also talk about Vim briefly and the _Editor Wars_
  and what the deal is with all those different keys.

**Getting started with Emacs** How to install Emacs, how to run it,
  and how to ensure you're using a reasonably new version of Emacs. I
  explain how modify Emacs and what you need to do to make your
  changes permanent. I will introduce the _Customize_ interface and
  how to load a color theme. And finally, I'll talk about the user
  interface of Emacs and some handy tips in case you get stuck.

**Discovering Emacs** Emacs is self-documenting; but what does it mean
  and how can you leverage that aspect to discover more about Emacs or
  answer questions you have about particular features? I will show you
  what I do when I have to learn how to use a new mode or feature in
  Emacs, and how you can use the self-documenting nature of Emacs to
  find things for which you're looking.

**Movement** How to move around in Emacs. At first glance a simple
  thing to do, but in Emacs there are many ways of going from where you
  are to where you need to go in the fewest possible
  keystrokes. Moving around is probably half the battle for a developer
  and knowing how to do it quickly will make you more efficient. Some
  of the things you'll learn: moving by syntactic units, and what
  exactly syntactic units are; using windows and buffers; searching
  and indexing text; selecting text and using the mark.

**Editing** As in the chapter on movement, I will show you how to edit
  text using a variety of tools offered to you by Emacs. This includes
  things like editing text by balanced expressions, words, lines,
  paragraphs; creating keyboard macros to automate repetitive tasks;
  searching and replacing; registers; multi-file editing;
  abbreviations; remote file editing; and more.

**Productivity** Emacs can do more than just edit text and this
  chapter is only a taste of what attracts so many people to Emacs:
  its tight integration with hundreds of external tools. I will whet
  your appetite and show you some of the more interesting things you
  can do when you choreograph Emacs's movement and editing.
