Tip 38: Manage Hidden Files
===========================

_When a buffer has been modified, Vim gives it special treatment to ensure that
we don't accidentally quit the editor without saving our changes. Find out how
to hide a modified buffer and how to handle hidden buffers when quitting vim._

Run these commands in the shell to launch Vim:

```bash
cd code/files
ls
Vim *.txt
```
Let's make a change to `a.txt`: we'll just press `Go` to append a blank line at
the end of the buffer. Without saving the changes, let's examine the buffer
list:

The buffer representing `a.txt` is annotated with a + sign, which indicates
that it has been modified. If we were to save the file now, the contents of the
buffer would be written do disk and the + annotation would go away. But let's
not save the buffer just yet. Instead, we'll try to switch to the next buffer:

```vim
:bnext
```
Vim raises an error message, reporting that the current buffer contains unsaved
changes. Let's try following the advice in parentheses and add a trailing bang
symbol:

```
:bnext!
:ls
```

The bang symbol forces Vim to switch buffers, even if our current buffer has
unsaved changes. When we run the `:ls` command now, `b.txt` is marked with the
letter `a` for `active`, while `a.txt` is marked with the letter `h` for
`hidden`.


Handle Hidden Buffers on Quit
-----------------------------

When a buffer is hidden, Vim lets us go about our business as usual. We can
open other buffers, change them, save them, and so on, all without
consequences-that is, right up until we attempt to close our editing session.
That's when Vim reminds us that we have unsaved changes in one of our buffers.

```
:quit
```

Vim loads the first hidden buffer with modifications into the current window
so that we can decide what to do with it. If we want to keep the changes, we
can run `:write` to save the buffer to a file. Or if we want to discard the
changes, we can instead run `:edit!`, which rereads the file from disk,
overwriting the contents of the buffer. Having reconciled the contents of the
buffer with the file on disk, we can try the `:quit` command again.

If we have more than one hidden buffer with modifications, then Vim activates
the next unsaved buffer each time we enter the `:quit` command. Again, we could
`:wirte` or `:edit!` to keep or discard the changes. This cycle continues until
we make a decision for each of the hidden buffers with modifications. When
there are no more windows and no more hidden modified buffers, the `:q` command
closes Vim.

If we want to quit Vim without reviewing our unsaved changes, we can issue the
`:qall!` command. Or, if we want to write all modified buffers without
reviewing them one by one, we can use the `:wall` command. Table 11, _Options
for Hidden Buffers on Quit_, on page 85 summarizes our options.

Enable the `hidden` Setting Before Running `:argdo` or `:bufdo`
---------------------------------------------------------------

By default, Vim prevents us from abandoning a modified buffer. Whether we use
the `:next!`, `:bnext!`, `:cnext!`, or any similar command, if we omit the
trailing bang symbol, Vim will nag us with the "No write since last change"
error message. In most cases, this message is a useful reminder. But in one
scenario it becomes a nuisance.

Consider the `:argo` and `:bufo` commands. The `:argdo {cmd}` command works
like this:

```
:first
:{cmd}
:next
:{cmd}
etc
```

If our chosen `{cmd}` modifies the first buffer, the `:next` command will fail.
Vim won't permit us to advance to the second item in the argument list until we
save the changes to the first item in the list. That's not much use!

If we enable the `hidden` setting (see `:h hidden`), then we can use the
`:next`, `:bnext`, `:cnext` (and so on) commands without a trailing bang. If
the active buffer is modified, Vim will automatically hide it when we navigate
away from it. The `hidden` setting makes it possible to use `:argo` and
`:bufdo` to change a collection of buffers with a single command.

After running `:arggo {cmd}`, we'll want to save the changes that we made to
each item in the argument list. We could do it one at a time by running
`:first` and then `:wn`, which would give use the opportunity to eyeball each
fie. Or if we're confident that everything is in order, we could run `:argdo
write` (or `:wall`) to save all buffers.
