Tip 39: Divide Your Workspace into Split Windows.
=================================================

_Vim allows use to view multiple buffers side by side by dividing our workspace
into split windows._

In Vim's terminology, a window is a view port onto a buffer (`:h
window`). We can open multiple windows, each containing the same
buffer, or we can load different buffers into each window. Vim's window
management system is flexible, allowing us to build a workspace tailored
to the demands of our worklfow.


Creating Split Windows
----------------------

When Vim starts up, it contains a single window. We can divide this window
horizontally with the `<C-w>s` command, which creates two windows of equal
height. Or we can use the `<C-w>v` command to split the window vertically,
producing two windows of equal width. We can repeat these commands as often as
we like, splitting our workspace again and again in a process that resembles
cell division.

The following figure illustrates a few of the possible results. In each case,
the shaded rectangle represents the active window.

Each time we use the `<C-w>s` and `<C-w>v` commands, the two resulting split
windows will contain the same buffer as the original window that was divided.
Having the same buffer displayed in separate windows can be useful, especially
if we're working on a long file. For example, we could scroll in one of the
windows to show a part of the buffer that we want to refer to while making
changes to another part of the buffer in the other window.

We can use the `:edit` command to load another buffer into the active window. If
we run `<C-w>s` followed by `:edit {filename}`, we can divide our workspace and
then open another buffer in one split window while keeping the existing buffer
visible in the other split. Alternatively, we could use the command `:split
{filename}`, which combines those two steps into one. This table summarizes the
ways of dividing our workspace into split windows:

Command            | Effect
--------           | -------
`<C-w>s`           | Split the current window horizontally, reusing the current buffer in the new window.
`<C-w>v`           | Split the current window vertically, reusing the current buffer in the new window.
`:sp[lit] {file}`  | Split the current window horizontally, loading `{file}` into the new window.
`:vsp[lit] {file}` | Split the current window vertically, loading `{file}` into the new window.


Changing the Focus Between Windows
----------------------------------

Vim provides a handful of commands for switching the focus between split windows.
This table summarizes some of the highlights (for the complete list, see `:h
window-move-cursor`):

Command  | Effect
-------- | -------
`<C-w>w` | Cycle between open windows.
`<C-w>h` | Focus the window to the left.
`<C-w>j` | Focus the window below.
`<C-w>k` | Focus the window above.
`<C-w>l` | Focus the window to the right.

In fact, `<C-w><C-w>` does the same thing as `<C-w>w`. That means we can press
the `Ctrl` key and hold it while typing `ww` (or `wj` or any of the others from
the table) to change the active window. It's easier to type `<C-w><C-w>` than
`<C-w>w`, even though it looks nastier when written down. Still, if you use
split windows heavily, you might want to consider mapping these commands to
something even more convenient.

If your terminal supports mouse interactions or if you're using GVim, then you
can also active a window by clicking it with the mouse. If it doesn't work for
you, check that the `mouse` option is set appropriately (`:h mouse`).

Closing Windows
---------------

If we want to reduce the number of windows in our workspace, we can take one of
two strategies. We could use the `:close` command to close the active window, or
if we want to close all windows _except_ the active one, we can instead use the
`:only` command. This table summarizes the options and shows the normal mode
equivalents:

Ex Command  | Normal Command | Effect
----------- | ----------------|-------
`:cl[ose]`  | `<C-w>c`| Close the active window.
`:on[ly]`   | `<C-w>o`| Keep only the active window, closing all others.


Resizing and Rearranging Windows
--------------------------------

Vim provides several key mappings for resizing windows. For the full list, look
up `:h window-resize`. This table summarizes a handful of the most useful
commands:

Keystrokes  | Buffer Content
----------- | ---------------
`<C-w>=`    | Equalize width and height of all windows
`<C-w>_`    | Maximize height of the active window
`<C-w>|`    | Maximize width of the active window
`[N]<C-w>_` | Set active window height to `[N]` rows.
`[N]<C-w>|` | Set active window width to `[N]` columns.


Resizing windows is one the few tasks I prefer to do with the mouse. It's
simple: click on the line that separates two windows, drag the mouse until each
window is the desired size, and then let go of the mouse. This works only if
your terminal supports the mouse or if you're using GVim.

Vim includes commands for rearranging windows, but rather than describing them
here, I'd like to point you toward a screencast on Vimcasts.org that
demonstrates the possibilities. You can also find more details by looking up `:h
window-moving`.
