Tip 40: Organize Your Window Layouts with Tab Pages
===================================================

_Vim's tabbed interface is different from that of many other text editors. We
can use tab pages to organize split windows into a collection of workspaces._

In Vim, a _tag page_ is a container that can hold a collection of windows (`:h
tabpage`). If you're accustomed to using another text editor, then Vim's tabbed
interface might seem strange at first. Let's being by considering how tabs work
in many other text editors and IDEs.

The classic graphical user interface (GUI) for a text editor features a main
workspace for editing files and a sidebar that shows the directory tree off the
current project. If we click on a file in the sidebar, it opens a new tab in the
main workspace for the specified file. A new tab is created for each file that
we open. In this model, we could say that the tabs represent the set of files
that are currently open.

When we open a file using the `:edit` command, Vim doens't automatically create
a new tab. Instead, it creates a new buffer and loads it into the current
window. Vim keeps track of the set of files that are open  using the buffer
list, as we saw in Tip 36, on page 77.

Vim's tab pages are not mapped to buffers in a one-to-one relationship. Instead,
think of a tab page as a container that can hold a collection of windows.
Figure 1, _Organizing split windows into tab pages_, on page 89, illustrates
a workspace with three tab pages, each containing one or more windows. In each
scenario, the shaded rectangles represent the active windows and tabs.

Tab pages are available to us whether we're using GVim or running Vim inside
a terminal. GVim draws a tab bar as part of the GUI, giving it an appearance
much like that of a web browser or any other tabbed interface. When Vim runs
inside a terminal, it draws a tab bar as a textual user interface (TUI), Apart
from the differences in appearance, tab pages are functionally identical whether
rendered as a GUI or a TUI.


How to Use Tabs
---------------

Vim's tab pages can be used to partition work into different workspaces. They
have more in common with the virtual desktops in Linux than they do with the
tabbed interface of most other text editors.

Suppose that we're at work on a project, with out workspace divided into a few
split windows. Out of the blue, something urgent comes up and we have to switch
contexts. Rather than opening new files in our current tab page, which would
mess up our carefully assembled workspace, we can create a new tab page and do
the work there. When we're ready to resume our previous work, we just have to
switch back to original tab page where all of our windows will have been
preserved as we left them.

The `:lcd {path}` command lets us set the working directory locally for the
current window. IF we create a new tab page and then use the `:lcd` command to
switch to another directory, we can then comfortably scope each tab page to
a different project. Note that `:lcd` applies locally to the current _window_,
not to the current _tab page_. If we have a tab page containing two or more spit
windows, we could set the local working directory for all of them by running
`:windo lcd {path}`. Check out episode 9 of Vimcasts for more information.

Opening and Closing Tabs
------------------------

We can open a new tab page with the `:tabedit {filename}` command. If we omit
the `{filename}` argument, then Vim creates a new tab page containing an empty
buffer.

Alternatively, if the current tab page contains more than one window, we can use
the `<C-w>T` command, which moves the current window into a new tab page (see
`:h CTRL-W_T`).

If the active tab page contains only a single window, the `:close` command will
close the window and tab page with it. Or we can use the `:tabclose` command,
which closes the current tab page no matter how many windows it contains.
Finally, if we want to close all tab pages except for the current one, we can
use the `:tabonly` command.


Command                 | Effect
------------------------|-------
`:tabe[dit] {filename}` | Open the `{filename}` in a new tab
`<C-w>T`                | Move the curent window into its own tab
`:tabc[lose]`           | Close the current tab page and all of its windows
`:tabo[nly]`            | Keep the active tab page, closing all others


Switching Between Tabs
----------------------

Tabs are numbered starting from 1. We can switch between tabs with the `{N}gt`
command, which can be remembered as _goto tab{N}_. When this command is prefixed
with a number,  Vim jupms to the specified tab, but if the number is omitted,
Vim advances to the next tab. The `gT` command does the same but in reverse.

Ex Command        | Normal Command   | Effect
----------------- | ---------------- | -------
`:tabn[ext] {N}`  | `{N}gt`          | Switch to tab page number {N}
`:tabn[ext]`      | `gt`             | Switch to next tab page
`:tabp[revious]`  | `gT`             | Switch to the previous tab page

Rearranging Tabs
----------------

We can use the `:tabmove [N]` Ex command to rearrange tab pages. When [N] is 0,
the current tab page is moved to the beginning, and if we omit [N], the current
tab page is moved to the end. If your terminal supports the mouse or if you're
using GVim, reordering tab pages by drag and drop is also possible.
